Update the instructions for upgrade of LLVM/Clang. (#1146)
microsoft/checkedc-clang: clang/docs/checkedc/Update-to-latest-LLVM-sources.md

versioned as &lt;major-version&gt;.&lt;minor-version&gt;.&lt;patch-version&gt;.
The LLVM/Clang repository has a branch called `main`, and several release
branches (created off `main`) called `release/<major-version>.x`, each
corresponding to the major version number of a release. New features go on the
`main` branch. At an appropriate commit on the `main` branch, a release branch
is created. Bug fixes go on the release branch and only some of these bug fixes
get merged back into the `main` branch. Typically, LLVM/Clang makes two final
releases for each major version.

Now we describe our approach for upgrading the `checkedc-clang` repository to
LLVM/Clang sources corresponding to the two releases for each major version,
for example, 12.0.0 and 12.0.1. The upgrade is performed in two phases as
described below. This description is followed by detailed instructions for each
phase.

**Phase 1**: We upgrade the `master` branch of the `checkedc-clang` repository
up to the commit hash on the `main` branch of the LLVM/Clang repository at which
the branch `release/12.x` is created - we shall refer to this commit hash as

> &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;. Note that &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;

Reviewer: Current LLVM practice seems to be to create a tag `llvmorg-13-init` referring to the commit _after_ the branch point for the LLVM 12 release, so you should be able to use `llvmorg-13-init^` as a commit expression referring to the branch point (`^` means "previous commit") rather than looking up the commit ID manually.

Author: We are not looking up the commit ID manually - we used the command `git merge-base main release/12.x` in a clone of the pristine LLVM/Clang repository. I have updated this in the document (I had missed it earlier). 

Additionally, 
   1) the commands `git merge-base main release/12.x` and `git show llvmorg-12-init^` show different commit hashes, and 
   2) we want &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt; to be a commit hash on the `main` branch.

Therefore, the document currently does not recommend the use of `llvmorg-12-init^` as &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;. We may investigate this further during the next LLVM/Clang upgrade.

All other review comments have been incorporated.

Reviewer: > 1. the commands `git merge-base main release/12.x` and `git show llvmorg-12-init^` show different commit hashes, and

That should be `git show llvmorg-13-init^`, which is indeed the same as `git merge-base main release/12.x`.  Still, `git merge-base main release/12.x` may be a clearer way to express what we want; good idea.

Author: Okay! Thanks for the clarification.

highly unlikely that the bug fixes on the release branches of the LLVM/Clang
repository will break Checked C build and tests. 

Note that Phase 1 and the sub-phases of Phase 2 may not be executed one after
another in one continuous stretch. They may be spread over several weeks and may
be interspersed with Checked C development on the `master` branch.

## Detailed Instructions - Phase 1

1. Create a new branch off the `baseline` branch in the `checkedc-clang`
repository. Let us call this new branch `updated_baseline`.
```        
    git checkout -b updated_baseline baseline
```     
2. Upgrade the branch `updated_baseline` to &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;
commit hash on the branch `main` of the LLVM/Clang repository. Record the commit
hash &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt; in the document LLVM-Upgrade-Notes.md.
```
    git remote add upstream https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git 
    git pull upstream <branch-point-of-12-on-main>
```
3. Execute  LLVM/Clang tests on the branch `updated_baseline` on your local
machine to make sure that the upgrade is stable.

4. Merge the `updated_baseline` branch back to the `baseline` branch.
```
    git checkout baseline

>     git merge updated_baseline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git merge --ff-only updated_baseline
```
We expect `updated_baseline` to be ahead of `baseline`.  If it's not, we should flag the problem for investigation rather than generate a merge commit.

you to set merge.renamelimit to a specific value. It is a good idea to set it as
suggested and re-run the merge. The last section in this document gives
guidelines on fixing the merge conflicts and test failures.
```
    git checkout updated_baseline_master_12
    git merge master > merge_conflict_list.txt
``` 
7. The resolution of test failures may require you to cherry-pick commits from
the upstream LLVM/Clang repository. Record the cherry-picked commits in the
document LLVM-Upgrade-Notes.md. Let &lt;commit-to-cherry-pick&gt; be one
such commit hash on branch &lt;cherry-pick-branch&gt; of the LLVM/Clang
repository. 
```
    git fetch upstream <cherry-pick-branch>
    git cherry-pick <commit-to-cherry-pick>
```
8. While the merge conflicts and test failures are being fixed, it is possible
that the `master` branch has had several commits. Merge the `master` branch into
`updated_baseline_master_12` branch, and resolve the new conflicts and failures
if necessary.
```
    git merge master >> merge_conflicts_list.txt
```
9. After all the merge conflicts and test failures on the local machine are
fixed, push the `baseline` and `updated_baseline_master_12` branches to the

> remote repository and excute the ADO tests on `updated_baseline_master_12`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remote repository and execute the ADO tests on `updated_baseline_master_12`.
```

```
    git push origin baseline
    git push origin updated_baseline_master_12
```
10. After the ADO tests are successful, merge the `updated_baseline_master_12`
branch into `master` and push to the remote repository.
```
    git checkout master

>     git merge updated_baseline_master_12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git merge --ff-only updated_baseline_master_12
```
You probably also want to make sure that this command advances `master` exactly to `updated_baseline_master_12` (which was tested in the previous step) rather than generating a merge commit (which could fail the tests if Checked C feature development on `master` interfered somehow with the baseline upgrade).

    git push origin master
```

## Detailed Instructions - Phase 2
We give the instructions for the first sub-phase of Phase 2. Similar steps
have to be followed for the other sub-phase.

1. Create a new branch, called `release_12.x`, from the `master` branch in the
`checkedc-clang` repository. If the branch already exists, then merge the
`master` branch into it. Resolve merge conflicts and test failures if any.
```        
    git checkout -b release_12.x master
    OR
    git checkout release_12.x
    git merge master
```     
2. Upgrade the branch `release_12.x` to the LLVM/Clang sources corresponding to

> the 12.0.0 release. For this, we need to get the commit hash associated with the
> 12.0.0 release from https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases. Let this 
> commit hash be &lt;12.0.0-commit-hash&gt;. Note that it should be the full
> commit hash. Resolve merge conflicts and test failures if any.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the 12.0.0 release, given by the `llvmorg-12.0.0` tag. Resolve
merge conflicts and test failures if any.
```
Another case where you can use a Git ref provided by LLVM rather than manually looking up a commit ID.

```
    git remote add upstream https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git

>     git pull upstream <12.0.0-commit-hash>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git pull upstream llvmorg-12.0.0
```

    If the version in HEAD is left in tree, it is very likely a valid change -
    the file may have been moved. If the version in `master` is left in tree,
    the files may be valid files that have been added as part of Checked C
    support:
    - `llvm/projects/checkedc-wrapper/lit.site.cfg.py`
    - `llvm/projects/checkedc-wrapper/lit.cfg.py`

    Others may need more investigation. For example, in the LLVM/Clang 11 to 12
    merge, two files which were reported by git as "Version master ... left in
    tree" were old versions lying around that needed to be deleted:
    - `clang/include/clang/StaticAnalyzer/Core/PathSensitive/SMTAPI.h`
    - `clang/include/clang/AST/TypeNodes.def`

2. While resolving merge conflicts, it is a good idea to have three reference
code snapshots to perform diffs of individual files to help distinguish between
checkedc-specific changes and llvm-11-to-12 changes:
    - The `master` branch of the `checkedc-clang` repository at the commit hash
  which was merged into `updated_baseline_master_12`.
    - The pristine LLVM/Clang source at &lt;branch-point-of-11-on-main&gt;
    - The pristine LLVM/Clang source at &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;

> 

Reviewer: I wholeheartedly agree with the value of being able to see all three versions of a file involved in a merge.  However, the description of the three versions here is accurate only for the initial merge from LLVM 11 to 12 in phase 1 step 6.  For a merge of additional Checked C feature development in phase 1 step 8, the relevant versions are `master`, the baseline LLVM 12 source, and _the merge of the previous `master` with the baseline LLVM 12 source_ that was completed in step 6 or an earlier iteration of step 8.

We are already assuming that `git merge` correctly identifies the three file versions to merge for files without conflicts, so for files that have pending conflicts, it is probably best to view the three file versions already identified by Git rather than try to look them up manually (which could be prone to mistakes/misunderstandings).  I know of a few ways to do that, which might be worth documenting in this file:

1. Best: Run `git mergetool`, assuming you have a suitable merge tool installed and configured.  I currently use kdiff3, but I don't know if it works on Windows or if other tools are better.
2. Set `git config merge.conflictstyle diff3` before running `git merge` so that the conflict markup written to the file shows all three versions rather than just two.  I recommend leaving this option on all the time; I've found that the extra information never hurts.
3. Run `git show :1:clang/path/to/some/File.cpp >clang/path/to/some/File.1.cpp` (and similarly with 2 or 3 in place of 1) to write out the three versions for inspection with other tools.

      to the `release_12.x` branch.
      - The release of the Checked C compiler happens from the `release_12.x`
      branch.
      

We do not expect substantial developer effort to be expended in Phase 2 as it is
highly unlikely that the bug fixes on the release branches of the LLVM/Clang
repository will break Checked C build and tests. 

Note that Phase 1 and the sub-phases of Phase 2 may not be executed one after
another in one continuous stretch. They may be spread over several weeks and may
be interspersed with Checked C development on the `master` branch.

## Detailed Instructions - Phase 1

1. Create a new branch off the `baseline` branch in the `checkedc-clang`
repository. Let us call this new branch `updated_baseline`.
```        
    git checkout -b updated_baseline baseline
```     
2. Upgrade the branch `updated_baseline` to &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;
commit hash on the `main` branch of the LLVM/Clang repository. Record the commit
hash &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt; in the document LLVM-Upgrade-Notes.md.
```
    git remote add upstream https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git 
    git pull upstream <branch-point-of-12-on-main>
```

> 3. Execute  LLVM/Clang tests on the branch `updated_baseline` on your local

Reviewer 2: Nit: extra space between "Execute" and "LLVM/Clang"

branch `updated_baseline` to be a descendant of branch `baseline`.
```
    git checkout baseline
    git merge --ff-only updated_baseline
```
5. Create a new branch, say, `updated_baseline_master_12` from the `baseline`
branch.
```
    git checkout -b updated_baseline_master_12 baseline
```
6. Merge the `master` branch of the checkedc-clang repository into the
`updated_baseline_master_12` branch. This merge may cause several merge
conflicts and test case failures. After the merge command, git may suggest to
you to set merge.renamelimit to a specific value. It is a good idea to set it as
suggested and re-run the merge. The last section in this document gives
guidelines on fixing the merge conflicts and test failures.
```
    git checkout updated_baseline_master_12
    git merge master > merge_conflict_list.txt
``` 
7. The resolution of test failures may require you to cherry-pick commits from
the upstream LLVM/Clang repository. Record the cherry-picked commits in the
document LLVM-Upgrade-Notes.md. Let &lt;commit-to-cherry-pick&gt; be one
such commit hash on branch &lt;cherry-pick-branch&gt; of the LLVM/Clang
repository. 
```
    git fetch upstream <cherry-pick-branch>

>     git cherry-pick <commit-to-cherry-pick>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git cherry-pick -x <commit-to-cherry-pick>
```
Recording `(cherry picked from commit X)` may be helpful.  I think your team has done this in other contexts.

on it and fix test failures to make sure that the branch is stable.
```
    git push origin release_12.x
```
## Practical Tips

1. If you use automated testing, make sure to clean the build directory first.
Enough changes will likely have accumulated that things may go wrong without
doing that first.

2. The test failures usually stem from incorrect merges or Checked C-specific data
not being initialized by new or changed constructor methods.

3. You'll want to run automated tests on Linux and Windows x86/x64, as well as
Linux LNT tests.  You may find in some cases that tests need to be updated
based on new warnings or slightly different compiler behavior.

4. The changes will be extensive enough that you don't want to do a pull request
on GitHub.  Just push the branches up to GitHub.

## Handling Merge Conflicts and Test Failures

1. When merge.renamelimit is set to a large value, the output of the `git merge`
command may have several lines like:
CONFLICT (rename/delete): ... in master renamed to ... in HEAD. Version HEAD ...
left in tree.
CONFLICT (rename/delete): ... in master renamed to ... in HEAD. Version master

> ... left in tree.

Reviewer: Format this as a code block rather than letting the two lines run together in the paragraph?

The LLVM/Clang repository has a branch called `main`, and several release
branches (created off `main`) called `release/<major-version>.x`, each
corresponding to the major version number of a release. New features go on the

> `main` branch. At an appropriate commit on the `main` branch, a release branch

Reviewer: The deletion of this line looks unintended.

`updated_baseline_master_12` branch, and resolve the new conflicts and failures
if necessary.
```
    git merge master >> merge_conflict_list.txt
```
9. After all the merge conflicts and test failures on the local machine are
fixed, push the `baseline` and `updated_baseline_master_12` branches to the
remote repository and execute the ADO tests on branch 
`updated_baseline_master_12`. Commits to the `master` branch should be held off
during the final execution of these tests, i.e. just prior to executing step 10
below. 
```
    git push origin baseline
    git push origin updated_baseline_master_12
```
10. After the ADO tests are successful, merge the `updated_baseline_master_12`
branch into `master` and push to the remote repository. If all the changes on
the `master` branch have been merged into the `updated_baseline_master_12`
branch in step 8, then it should be possible to do a fast-forward merge of
branch `updated_baseline_master_12` into the `master` branch.
```
    git checkout master

>     git merge -ff-only updated_baseline_master_12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git merge --ff-only updated_baseline_master_12
```

    - The pristine LLVM/Clang source at &lt;branch-point-of-11-on-main&gt;
    - The pristine LLVM/Clang source at &lt;branch-point-of-12-on-main&gt;

    The description of the three snapshots above holds only for the initial 
    merge from LLVM 11 to 12 in phase 1 step 6. For a merge of additional
    Checked C feature development in phase 1 step 8, the relevant versions are a
    snapshot of branch `updated_baseline_master_12` after step 6 or an earlier
    iteration of step 8 (i.e. the common ancestor), a snapshot of the current
    `master` branch that is being merged, and a snapshot of the current

>     `updated_baseline_master_12` branch before starting the merge.

Reviewer: I don't think this description of the relevant versions is correct.  See this diagram of two successive merges:
```
LLVM 11 -> master (step 6)      -> master (step 8)
   |              |                       |
   v              v                       v
LLVM 12 -> ubm12 (after step 6) -> ubm12 (after step 8)
```
IIUC, the versions in the document correspond to "ubm12 (after step 6)", "master (step 8)", and `updated_baseline_master_12` after step 7 (which could differ from its value after step 6 due to manual cherry-picks and fixes).  But from the diagram, it seems clear that the common ancestor is "master (step 6)" and the other two versions are "master (step 8)" and "ubm12 (after step 6)".

Perhaps this illustrates the point that we should use the three versions identified by Git rather than trying to determine them manually and potentially making mistakes.  I realize now that it's possible to get the commit IDs via `$(git merge-base HEAD MERGE_HEAD)`, `HEAD`, and `MERGE_HEAD`.  So we can still "use source snapshots" but query the commit IDs from the in-progress merge rather than determine them manually.

Author: Very true! I have incorporated your review comments. Thanks for the review!
